(I will remove most of the “you see” in the video, which are not of much importance.)


The mathematical association of America
The mathematical association of America presents
MAA video classics number 1  George Polya in teaching us a lesson
copyright 1966 The mathematical association of America All Rights Reserved Unauthorized Reproduction is Prohibited

What I am trying to present you today will not be a lecture.
It will be rather a demonstration or an experiment.
In this experiment or demonstration or whatever you like to call it
has the aim to present to you my attitude to teaching.
You see, this is not a method, it is not a system.
Teaching is not a science, it’s an art.
You cannot put it clearly in a system,
but you may have an attitude to it.
This attitude cannot be easily described inverts.
More in acts and I will show you that afterwards if I can,
but I can tell you a few slogans.
Let me put my first point in the question and answer form.
What is teaching? 
In my opinion, teaching is giving opportunity to the students to discover thinks by themselves. 
Not a teacher should tell the things to the students.
If they wish to learn, clearly, they have to discover it.
The second point: first guess then prove.
All great discoveries were made in this type.
The discoveries in the mind of Archimedes or Gauss or Newton, they are conceived this way or 
anyhow some of the important terms(?). 
Any kids in the classroom finds, thinks this way: first guess then prove.
My third point is a straightforward application of this point to Mathematics.
Mathematics seems to consist of proofs, but it’s not quite so.
Finished Mathematics consists of proofs. 
But Mathematics in the making consists of guesses.


Let us teach guessing
A Demonstration with George Polya 1965 Mathematical association of America

produced for committee on Educational media
Mathematical association of America

Introduction 
Professor R.A. Rosenbaum Wesleyan University

The academic ideal in mathematics as well as other disciplines is that of 
the scholar teacher, the person who can contribute notably to the world store of 
knowledge and understanding 
and who can also make other in their teaching effectiveness.

One man is acknowledged to be pro-eminent,  to be the paradigm
the archetype and model for us all.
This exemplar is George Polya. Much of Polya’s 
academic life was spent in Swiss land after his education in Budapest.

He came to the United States and joined Stanford faculty in 1942. 
He holds numbers of honorary degrees and has written many books and some 220 articles. Most of them proves
his imaginative mathematical research.

His contribution to the combined field of mathematics and mathematical education are unequal. 
The demonstration which you are about to see is truly un-rehearsed and spontaneous. 
It illustrates his extraordinary his uncanny ability to stimulate a group to guess intelligently to
make reasonable conjectures, 
a process which is essential to mathematical discovery.

<---
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I don’t wish to give you a lecture but I wish to teach you about guessing. 
It’s very important part in life to be a good guesser. 
It’s very important part in mathematics. 
You wonder a little how. Because if anywhere, so in mathematics you have proofs. 
And only that is valid in mathematics (for its proofs?) 

What is tell it apart of guessing. Yes there is apart. 
Mathematics when it’s finished, complete or done, then it consists of proofs. 
But when it is discovered, it always starts with a guess. 
And I wish to give you a real experience of it.
So I don’t wish to give you a lecture. 
But we play together a guessing game. 
You should find out from your own experience what is reasonable guessing. 
Not wild guessing that get anywhere. 
Wild guesses you don't have to learn in order to wild guess (?)
The less you know, the easier to make a wild guess. 
But an educated guessing, a reasonable guessing that is something else. 
That should be learned. 
In mathematics class a good opportunity to learn. 
So we play together a guessing game. 
This like any other games, there is rules.
But the rules are very simple. 
And there are just two rules. 
One for those people who will know the answer to my question. I hope they are very few. 
But if you know my question, you know my problem, don’t answer my question. That will be unfair. 
if you know the answer in advance. (?)
You would spoil the fun of all of us. 
So don’t do that. 
However, if you don’t know the answer to my question, then don’t hold back. 
Don’t be bashful but guess.

Of course, your guess maybe wrong. 
but that’s fun of the art of guessing.(?)

Even if they are wrong, the wrong guess is helpful. (?)
The wrong guess leads you to a better guess, and to a still better guess.
Finally you get the truth. 
Well that’s enough introduction. 
Let’s go into the matter.

So I give you a problem to guess. 

It will be really a problem of solid geometry.
but you know solid geometry not much is there to know (?)

For instance, everybody know what is a plane.
A plane is very flat. 
The top of this desk. 
This is part of a plane. 
Or approximately, the better it is made, 
the smoother it is, the flatter it is 
the better it presents the ideal plane of mathematics
but the ideal plane of mathematic also
go in all directions. It is infinite
so you know what is a plane
it’s flat and infinite. 
Now my problem is about planes. 
several of them.
(?) And to tell the whole story, 
about 5 planes. 
So you image 5 planes. 
If you cut this room 
one plane, two planes, 3, 4 5 planes.
Now these 5 planes cut the space in many parts or divisions or 
compartments or whatever you call it. 
And that is the question:
How many parts? 
This is my question. Or almost. There is something to be added. 
But I wait till you to find the it yourself. 
But you understand. 
Image a big piece of cheese. Some cheese you like. 
It may be green cheese.
Swiss cheese. whatever you like. And then you got
One, two, three, four five.  very (?)
there are lots of many pieces.   

have to guess how many. (?)

who is ready to say the guess?
don’t be bashful?
Go ahead. 
Say something. 
25
25
How did you get it. 
5 * 5
That’s an idea. 
There is some idea. Good. 
Anybody ready for other guess?
Yes, please.
32 
32?
have something behind you. 32. Interesting
Quite big number.
Still another guess?

Well that’s enough to start with. 
Can both guesses be correct?
Can both guesses be correct?
Yes. 
Yes?
Oh. That’s interesting. I didn't expect this answer.
But you may be right, who knows? 

(?)
All right. Any other guess?
Any other questions. 
Yes please.
I say 10 spaces.
10 spaces, 10, so many. 

Well we shall see who is right. 
but you see there is an other point.
Guessing is the important beginning of solving any problem.

The real problem is difficult. The real problem is difficult so that it becomes a problem. (?)

It belongs to the idea of the problem. with some difficulty. 
So if you cannot do a problem,
what to do?
Just wait for an idea? No 
The correct thing is try to image some easier problem, which could 
prepare you for the problem. 
Some easier problem which could help.
In this case, it is not very difficult. 
Image. 
you should be suspicious in life(you see). 
So if I ask you 5 planes, then you should have
asked you self
Why does he ask just 5?
Why not 4?
Why not 6?
So what will you ask?
yes?
I guess you mean, how many planes, say 3 planes
3 planes good.

The simplest model will be 2 planes. 
the two planes 
Is that simplest?
1, 1 plane. Oh yes. 
So we have found the simplest. One. 
Yes. That it is. 

In mathematics, often the simplest is the best. 


So, here is. 
Here is for you one plane. 
Or you tell me that is just one line on the blackboard. 
Yes, it is true. 
But I mean in the following way:  

this line on the blackboard is the intersection of the blackboard with this plane
By this plane I am showing you a horizontal plane. 
In this horizontal plane could be the surface of quiet water. of a reflecting bond. 
There is nothing else in the world. 
Just this surface. Over it air, under it water. 

So how many parts? Two. Good. 
Please. 
Could I add 12 to the guess?
12. Oh Yes. 
Guesses are always accepted. 12.
So… but in this case, there are just two parts. 
Is that clear? You see, 
But in mathematics, it’s an advantage ? First of all
You can make yourself completely clear the simplest case. 
And they are useful. 

So in order not to forget it, I wish to note it down. So I have just one dividing plane. 
It's long to write dividing plane. So I just write ding.
And it’s just 1 dividing plane, then the number of parts is exactly two. 
Good. 
This was one. 
So what is the next case?
After one. 
What comes after one? 
Two. 
That’s good. So great. Count to two(?)

So here. 
Any plane. (?)
Or you see this is not a plane. Just a line. Yes. But I mean so. 
You will see this line is the intersection of the plane of the blackboard with such a plane. 

So you have two planes. One, two. 
How many parts do you see? 
Four. 
Please, answer loudly. 
You can shout much louder. 
OK. So you have two planes, you have 4 parts. 
Good. 
Now what about 3 planes?
Well, I will tell you once, yes please.
Could I ask you a question? 
Yes, please, do ask questions. 
If the planes were parallel, was it still divide them ?

Very good question. 
I am waiting just for your question.
That is a very good question. 

If all the planes are parallel, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, then it’s not problem. 
If all 5 planes are parallel, use your imagination, like that. Then how many parts? 6

Well then, the whole problem will be over. This cannot be the question. 
Very good question. 
I wanted you to bring it out. 
Yes, my question was incompletely stated.  And that was so intentionally. 

Because problems in life, even in science, they are often incompletely stated.  
You have to find out what the real question is. 

So my real question is (you see), the planes should not be parrallel. 
Or should not all pass (?) the same point. 
They should be taken at random.

Here is one plane. Here. Let us ? the plane. 
And then you wish to make other planes. 

Well, how should I make other plane? 
You could make on a piece of wood. You could make two planes. 
Well, It’s pretty difficult to make a good plane surface on the piece of wood. 

And you make one, then the second should be parallel. 
Do you think you will ever succeed? 
Maybe will be good enough for the piece of wood. You wouldn’t see the difference. 
But both were put far enough, very likely it will have little little inclination.
And when far enough, they will do what? they will not be parallel, they will meet, intersect. 

So you see, if the planes are taken at random. 
Then no two will be parallel, or no three will pass through the same line. 
That is almost impossible. 

Well I hope you have a sound idea about it. 

So these are two planes taken at random. 
Are you feel happy about your question? 
Yes. 
Good. That’s a very good question. 

Now look here. 
So one plane, two planes. How many parts? 
Four. Four. Good. 
Answer (?)
we got over it. 

Now three planes. 
Three planes. 
It will be a better idea to put it just. That will be a better idea. 
? 
Oh I know. The blackboard that is the third plane. It’s good enough for the third plane. 
Then look here. 
The two planes indicateing by the lines and the blackboard. 
They are some of the parts are in the room in front of the blackboard. How many such? 
Four. 
Good. 
Some other parts are outside the room behind the blackboard. 
How many such? 
Four. 

So all together, how many? 
Eight. 
Good. Eight. 
Now look here. Perhaps the most important point. You understood now the problem. 

I have so little space. I must erase it. 
But here will come really the most important.

I wish to (?) told you attention to the most important points in reasonable guessing. 
If had more time I will introduce each much slower,  
But we have little time?.
So I tell you one interesting important point to think of. 
Extreme cases. 

For instance, in our case, such an extreme case will be
Number of dividing plane will be 0. Well, then   
There is just one space. Good. 
Now, let me come to the next case. We have 4 dividing planes. 
Try to guess it. 4 dividing planes. How many parts? 
Wow, so many hands. 
You take it. 
Sixteen? 
Sixteen. 
Who seconds the motion?
Woo, everybody. Good. 
So 16. 

Well I must tell you that is a reasonable guess. 
It's the time to tell you the difference between a wild guess and a reasonable guess. 
A wild guess come just out of the blue(?) nothing. 
But a reasonable guess is based on something. 
For instance, this guess, 16 was based on observation. 
Before guessing 16, you observed the numbers. 1, 2, 4, 8. 
Well, what did you observe. What observation?
What did you observe?
They seem to be the powers of 2. 
Yes. Powers of 2. This is zero's power. Second. Third. 
Each is the double of the foregoing power of 2. OK. 

So you observed a pattern, regularity, law. Pattern, Law, Regularity. 
You can call it. (?)
You observed that. 
And there is one more point. 
Perhaps you did not pay attention to it but it's very important.
After having observed this pattern, you had some courage to say or see(?). 
Or you didn’t see, you just saw it. Or you didn't think it.  
But I wish to point out that
belongs to it. 
You see, in soon. 
It will go ?
It is two not only in the cases observed, but in all the other cases. 
Step of generalization. 


It is through the case observed. 
So ? Steps of generalization. 
So we got 16 in a reasonable way of guessing. 
We observed. We found pattern. And we think (?) it will go on like this. 
We made generalization. 
This is very important. 
wish very important ?
You hear all the time about it. 
This is important in all the sciences. 
How do you call that?
When you get a generalization starting from observation. 
Observed low, generalized. 
That has a name. 
Induction. That’s fine. 
Our science is inductive. It is. 
All our knowledge was obtained in this way. 
Well, ?
There are some essential points about induction. 
So I must admit it is a reasonable guess.
But is it proofed? 
Is 16 certain or not? Yes or no. 
No. 
Answer with more conviction. Louder. 
No. 

Now. Good. 
So I put a ? after 16. It is doubtful. 
Now you see what is very important in? reasonable guessing. 
You shouldn't pull it back. That's not good. 
You can guess. 
What you should not do that you believe your own guesses.
Believing a little bit in your guess is healthy. ?
But believe completely your guess, well that's the stand point of savagers, not of educated peoeple. 
So you doubted. And that's not enough. You have to doubted ?
You have to test your guess. 
You have to check it. 
Your guess was a prediction. 
You predicted if I put 4 planes at random, then there will be 16 pieces of space. 
You predicted that. 
BTW, I will tell you it is not very easy to image four planes at random in space.
except one point, something remarkable happens.
And that we can understand a little by the analogy of the the plane. 

Analogy is another important point in guessing.  

We discussed division of space by planes. 
Space divided by planes. 
But simpler? division of a plane by straight lines. 
For instance, if I divide this plane by just one straight line, then how many parts are in the plane? 
Two?
Two. 
They have name. Call them two half planes.
That's what you wanted to say. 
Two half planes. Good. 
Let's note that. 
Planes divided by lines. 
If you divided by one line, there are two half planes. 
If you divide by two lines, on the blackboard, how many parts are there?
Four. 
Four. 

May I direct your attention to that all four parts are infinite. It's not bounded. You can go away in this part as far as you wish, from the point of intersection. All four parts are infinite.

But if you introduce a third line. Just random at any position. Like that. 
Then something happens. 
Then there is one division of the space which is more interesting than the others. It is bounded for all sides. It is finite. How do you call this part?

What is that? You don't know that?
Triangle. 
Yes. You know it. 
It's a triangle. 
So if you introduce 3 lines, then you introduce a triangle. 

I foresaw this difficulty, so I show you this same figure again.

By introducing three lines, you got a triangle finite.?

And in space, if you introduced a fourth plane, then something similar happens. 
You got a finite body. Four plane include ?
What is the solid body by four planes? 
Tetrahedron. So that's the answer. 

So there is the Tetrahedron. So if you introduce four planes, you get a finite part of the space.
That is the new things that happens. 

After that it's easy to record, it is easy to visualize the whole situation. 
Of course, this planes (?)
picture, because this is go to infinite.

They still cut the space in many parts. 
One of them finite, the other go to infinite?

And how many should there be? 
What did you say? How many should there be? 
Now stick to your guess. Say what you did before. 16. 16. That's 16.
Now we shall see. 
Can you just by looking at the ? Can you? How many? 15. How did you come?

Are you sure that you counted correct?

You see you could make mistakes in two ways. There is some parts you forgot. 

Some part you may count it twice. 
But you counted fifteen. 
Could you explain us how?
First I counted the tetrahedron, then your drawn small tetrahedrons at the vertices. (?)
There will be one for each edge of the Tetrahedron. 
Oh Yes. 
He is very clever. Very good. 
Did the others follow? Well I think he is right. It seems that he is right. 
I don't know. 
follow. 
You see, you can do it by analogy. 
Consider first the similar case in the planes. 
How many (parts) are there in the plane, given there are three lines? 
How many parts?
Just look at it. 
Loud please. Seven. Yes. 
Now you can count seven parts in various ways. 
One way of counting is the 
finite part is just one. This is the most interesting part. This is triangle. 
The others are infinite. And they are around it. 

I put my finger here and start counting. 
One, two, three, four, five, six.
One and six make seven. 
Yes, that's good. But not good enough. 
Because this I cannot quite imitate in space. 
Also in space, all the parts are around, but not around exactly in the same way. 
They don't surround in the same way. 
So we must count it in the more sophiscated manner.

Tell you how. Two different part?
There is really two differnet types of parts. 

For example, this part has ?

This part has the common with the triangle.
How many such? 
Three. 
Loud please.
Three. 

Good. But there are still 
This one has in common.
Vertex. 
How many such? 
Three. 
Three again. 
Now 1 + 3 + 3 = 7
In easier way to count, 
I hope we can imitate it in space. 
That was your idea. Very good. 
So he was jumped ahead of all us. 

So let me repeat the question. 
We have four planes, including a finite solid, a tetrahedron. 
And it cut space in several pieces. 
Inside of the tetrahedron is one of them, especially important. 
This is the only finite one. All the others are around. 
If you have to count, 
In one of your ?
I just try to bring everybody to the same point, how to count. 

So analoy to the case in the plane. 
Also here, finite part. Finite. 
So analogy between the plane this, and the space, that figure. 

Finite part in both cases, now how many? 
Here one the triangle, and there the tetrahedron. That is just one. 
So finite is just one. 

But as in the plane case, all the others are around have something common. 
For instance, there are some facing ?
Goes from the whole face, a face. A triangle. 
How many such?
Four. 

Even without look at the figure I can see that you are right. 
Tetrahedron has four faces. 
But others has less in commen. 
Just an edge. 
An infinite part like this. 


Such a cutting edge. 
How many such? 
Six. 
So having the edge in common. There are six. 
And there is one more. 
Just a point in common. 

These are emphisis

Peek into below. Peek from above. 

How many such? 
Four. 

I think vertex ?

How many all together. 
I am quite exited, aren't you. 
1 + 4 + 6 + 4 = 15. 
15? But you told me 16. 

So what 16?

I think maybe this is the special case. Special case, because three of the planes have 
Well you are right. 
You should always raise doubt.

But I think it's a general case.  
A special case for instance, 
Two planes are parallel. ?
If one plane, little intersection. 
intersection somewhere. 
But it is pretty hard
Change the phase, quite bit angle, not change. 

Yes, please. 

The case we did before when we thought it was 16. (?) On the board, when you represent the planes by those lines. 
And you had the forth by blackboard. 
This is about lines. Lines in the plane. In the third case you represent 
you represent those three planes by three line. 

From the blackboard. 
That was general case. 
If you change any directions,
You are right. You should always doubt. 
But I think it is general. to you. 
What is ?
I think 15 in all if all planes. 

That is a very special case. 
Three planes intersect the 
The forth should just pass the point. 
It is a little more difficult. You don't have. 
But I can assure you there 

The new plane cut all the old pieces into two, then you have twice as many. 

I didn't quite get. 

The new plane are speculation base on the fact that each additional plane yield. 

Well that 
That was your guess. 
That will be true if , but it doesn't. 

Well, look here. Don't follow anything easier?
16 was a reasonable guess. It was not a wild guess. 

It was an obvious regularity. 
That experience 
is the following

reasonable guess maybe wrong. 

So he is right. 
It is wrong. 
15 is right. 

It is erased. But I hope it's not erased in your memory. 

belong to this analogy. 
Without analogy, it will be much hard to find the number 15. 

Another interesting case is the 

We just divide the space by planes, 

Let's 

If you have one dividing line, you have two. 

If you have three dividing lines, 

Space divided by planes, plane divided by planes. 
What comes after. 

That's a clever conjuection. 
It goes to the 

What next? 
Line divided by points. 
Line divided by points. 

That is much simpler. It's no dividing point then there is just one line. 
If there is just one dividing point, how many? Two. Two. 
If you have two dividing points, how many? Three. 
If I have three dividing points, how many pieces? Four. 
Four dividing points, Five. 

N + 1. 
You see, that should give you if you are inclined to do something in research. 
amitious questions. 
What you should have a formula 

This is amitious. 
In science. 
But in science, you should have ambitious. 

If you have 5 dividing plane, then space 

We collected some 

One two, four, eight. 4th power, here 1, 2, 4. 

Line is how many dimension? One. 
Two is already too high. 

There is something in this number. 
Challeng. What should I write here. 
what should I write here? 
29. 
29. Perhaps. 
28. 
Now I am short of space. 
21. 
21. 

I don't 
26. 
so many difference. 

Could you explain your reason. 

Well, perhaps in this column. 

4, the 2, 2. 
So this is the pattern discovered. 

49:46
This is a reasonable guess. 
It's based on observation. 
Courage. Is it right?
You had the courage. 
If we go on, 
So you had the courage. 
Is 11 proved? 
Proved or not? 
Is 26 proved. 
No. 
That was better. 

It's another question. 

Do you believe it? 
Do you believe it? 
Sort of. 
That was a good.
Cautious. 
You believe it in half and half. 

But I can tell you. One of the important is to test your guess. 
You have to test your guess. 

So you guess 11, 26. 

I have 


She predicted 11. 

How many finite part? 
Three. 
So finite parts are three. 
Now the infinite part, so I put here my finger 
My finger that is one. 3, 4, 5, 6,7, 8
3 + 8 = 11.

So 11 seems 
I will be more interesting. 
26 was a guess. It is still a guess. But the situaion is a little different. 
influence the conviction. 
After the verification of 11, do you believe in 26 more or less? 
More. 
I think that's reasonable. 

Now should you believe it? 
Sort of 

Not proved. 
What kind of proof

Mathematics inductive. 
Everything 

So 26 is not proofed. 

You see, for us the most important part 

It's good to look at 
induction is very important. 

But just looking at is not enough. 
If you detect a 
boyfriend. 
Detect a pattern. 
have the courage to 
Generalize 
Altogether 

Test the guess. 
Between the savagae and science. 
Scientist sort of believe 
Some guess are more 
So you have all thing to 
Last 
have to test the guess. 
Keep 
fact and guess. 
This distinction. 

All royal sciociety. 
distinction between the 
Sir John 
come to a meeting a little later. 
cloak
Please sir 
I will give you the hat 
What will happen to his hat? 

Well how do you 

It is the hat you gave me. 

With Financial support from the national science foundation

A Kurt Simon production
Production director
Kurt simon

Executive production
Filmed in Hollywood California